---
layout: page
title: Curriculum Vitae
subtitle: 
---

<title></title>

<style type="text/css">
 @page { size: 21cm 29.7cm; margin: 2cm }
 h2 { margin-top: 0.31cm; margin-bottom: 0.25cm; background: transparent; page-break-before: auto; page-break-after: avoid }
 h2.western { font-family: "Liberation Sans", sans-serif; font-size: 15pt; font-weight: bold }
 h2.cjk { font-family: "Microsoft YaHei"; font-size: 16pt; font-weight: bold }
 h2.ctl { font-family: "Lucida Sans"; font-size: 16pt; font-weight: bold }
 h1 { margin-bottom: 0.21cm; background: transparent; page-break-before: auto; page-break-after: avoid }
 h1.western { font-family: "Liberation Sans", sans-serif; font-size: 17pt; font-weight: bold }
 h1.cjk { font-family: "Microsoft YaHei"; font-size: 18pt; font-weight: bold }
 h1.ctl { font-family: "Lucida Sans"; font-size: 18pt; font-weight: bold }
 dd { margin-left: 1cm; margin-bottom: 0.25cm; line-height: 115%; background: transparent }
 p { margin-bottom: 0.25cm; line-height: 115%; background: transparent; page-break-before: auto }
 strong { font-weight: bold }
 cite { font-style: italic }
 a:visited { color: #800000; so-language: zxx; text-decoration: underline }
 a:link { color: #000080; so-language: zxx; text-decoration: underline }
 </style>

# Dr. Patrick Blaser

## Post-Doctoral Research Assistant

at University of Lausanne, Institute of Earth Sciences, Faculty of
Geosciences and Environment (since March 2021)

# Earlier Employment:

07.2017 – 10.2020: Post-Doctoral
 Research Assistant, Heidelberg University, Institute
 of Earth Sciences, Past Ocean Dynamics group

08.2013 – 06.2017: Doctoral Research Assistant, Heidelberg
 University, Institute of Environmental Physics, Physics of
 Environmental Archives

# Education:

PhD. in Physics at Heidelberg
 University, Institute of Environmental Physics (2013 – 2017)

MSc. in Physics at Heidelberg University (2011 – 2013)

BSc. in Physics at Heidelberg University (2007 – 2011)

# Additional experience:

2021: Convenor of Goldschmidt
 geochemistry conference session *“Drivers of the climate system
 over the Cenozoic Era**”*

2020: Solicited presentation at EGU General Assembly (**Sharing Geoscience
 Online****)** session “*Tracers in the Paleo Sea*”
 (presented online)

2020: Invited presentation about climate change for A-level students
 at “Akademie für Kommunikation”, Karlsruhe, Germany

2019: Lead convenor of EGU General Assembly session *“**The
 role of ocean circulation in glacial-interglacial climates”*

2018: Participation on research cruise M151 onboard RV Meteor
 (CTD and multi-corer operations, sediment pore water
 extractions; Eastern North Atlantic and Azores Plateau)

2018: Invited Talk at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, USA

2018: Participation and presentation at PAGES’ OC3 / IPODS
 workshop in Cambridge, UK

2017: Participation on research cruise M141-2 onboard RV Meteor
 (CTD operations; Eastern North Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea)

2017: Nature Geoscience Poster Award at Pages Young Scientists
 Meeting in Zaragoza

2013: Setting up and managing clean labs for the analysis of trace
 metal isotopes (since then)

2013: Participation at ECORD Summer School “*Deep-Sea Sediments
 – From Stratigraphy to Age Models*”, Marum, Bremen

2011: Internship at Southampton Oceanographic Centre, UK, in Gavin
 Foster’s research group, working on boron isotope analyses from
 planktonic foraminifera

2009: Erasmus exchange semester at the University of Manchester, UK

# Additional qualifications:

- Languages: German (native speaker), English (fluent), French (good
   command), Spanish (good command)

- Programming: R (good proficiency), Visual Basic (intermediate),
   Python (basics)

- Laboratory methods: identifying and picking foraminifera and other
   sediment particles, sequential sediment leaching, total
   digestions, chemical column chromatography, clean lab usage and
   management

- Mass spectrometry: MC-ICP-MS (experienced), ICP-QMS (experienced),
   TIMS (basic knowledge)

- (Clean) wet chemistry laboratory and mass spectrometer management

- Research vessel CTD operations and sample treatment as well as
   sediment pore water sampling (via centrifugation)

# Work and research philosophy:

Coming from a physics education with interest in
chemistry and working in palaeoclimatology and marine isotope
geochemistry, I like to keep a broad and comprehensive view of my
research topic. To achieve this, I desire to discuss my own and
other’s research in detail, because often the different lines of
thinking and different experiences can have significant impact on the
interpretations of complex data. Thus, a good connection with experts
in different subjects is crucial. Furthermore, I try to use
statistical analyses and simple box models as often as possible to
make processes (or their absence) visible that tend to be obscured in
heaps of scattering and variably biased data, and estimate their
significance. On the data side, I like to know exactly what my
methods do and how they work, and use this knowledge to make the
analyses robust and efficient so that a larger sample throughput can
be achieved. This in turn lets me gain better spatial and temporal
coverage of palaeoclimatological data and decreases the risk of bias,
thus increasing our confidence and the significance of the
interpretations. Moreover, I enjoy to supervise student theses and to
teach classes, and I hope to have an according position with time to
invest in the latter in the future.

# Ongoing projects:

## Atlantic deep water mass distribution since the Last Glacial Maximum

The last glacial maximum about 20 thousand years
ago, and the following deglaciation and warm Holocene form the best
and most precisely investigated time interval for palaeo climate
research. My primary goal is to further question and improve our
understanding of the changes that occurred in this period in the
oceans and the whole climate system. I am particularly interested in
investigating this problem from different angles with different
sedimentary proxies such as stable isotopes in foraminifera shells,
the neodymium (Nd) isotope composition of authigenic precipitates, or
the ratio of the two uranium-derived isotopes protactinium and
thorium. Combining different proxies allows for more comprehensive
and accurate conclusions and the evasion of biases that may occur if
we only investigate one proxy at a time. Most of our established
views of changes in the distribution of water masses in the deep
ocean rely on nutrient-based proxies and, for example, Nd isotopes as
an inorganic water mass provenance tracer can add a complementing
different view to these studies.

## Biological productivity, ocean circulation, and carbon storage in the Southern Ocean

The Southern Ocean connects all world oceans and
hosts formation of the densest waters that fill the deep ocean
basins. Active vertical mixing around its frontal systems leads to
high primary productivity. Apart from its ecological importance, this
productivity binds the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and exports it to the deep ocean via sinking organic
particles, where it can be stored for hundreds and thousands of
years. Therefore, the circulation and productivity of the Southern
Ocean are an integral modulator of global climate. In this project I
investigate both these processes with biogenic and non-biogenic
proxies across the last glacial cycle.

## Deep sea sediments as sinks and sources of dissolved trace metals

The oceans are full of trace metals that reside in
the water column for different durations, depending on their chemical
speciation and specific conditions of the seawater. Marine sediments
are a major sink for most of them, leading to their long time storage
and geological recycling. Thus, the distribution of these trace
metals in the seawater-derived phase of sediments can yield
information about the conditions of past seawater. For example, the
speciation and thus reactivity and residence time of many trace
metals depends on the seawater redox conditions, which are tightly
linked to oxygen concentrations and can therefore serve as a proxy
for past deep ocean oxygenation.

# Publications:

## 2021

- Pöppelmeier, F., Gutjahr, M.,
   **Blaser, P.**, Schulz, H., Süfke, F., Lippold, J., 2021. Stable
   Atlantic Deep Water Mass Sourcing on Glacial-Interglacial
   Timescales. **Geophysical Research Letters** 48, e2021GL092722.

- Jakob, K.A., Pross, J., Link, J.M., **Blaser, P.**, Hauge
   Braaten, A., Friedrich, O., 2021. Deep-ocean circulation in the
   North Atlantic during the Plio-Pleistocene intensification of
   Northern Hemisphere Glaciation (~2.65–2.4 Ma). ***Marine
   Micropaleontology*** 165, 101998.

## **2020**

- Pöppelmeier, F., Scheen, J., **Blaser, P.**, Lippold,
   J., Gutjahr, M., Stocker, T.F., 2020. Influence of Elevated Nd
   Fluxes on the Northern Nd Isotope End Member of the Atlantic During
   the Early Holocene. ***Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology*** 35, e2020PA003973.

- Pöppelmeier, F., **Blaser, P.**, Gutjahr, M., Jaccard, S. L.,
   Frank, M., Max, L., Lippold, J. (2020) Northern-Sourced Water
   Dominated the Atlantic Ocean during the Last Glacial Maximum.
   ***Geology***, *48* (8), 826–829.

- **Blaser, P.**,
   Gutjahr, M., Pöppelmeier, F., Frank, M., Kaboth-Bahr, S., Lippold,
   J. (2020). Labrador Sea bottom water provenance and REE exchange during the
   past 35,000 years. ***Earth and Planetary
   Science Letters*** 542, 116299.

- Pöppelmeier, F., Gutjahr, M., **Blaser, P.**, Oppo, D.W.,
   Jaccard, S.L., Regelous, M., Huang, K.-F., Süfke, F., Lippold, J.
   (2020). Water mass gradients of the mid-depth Southwest Atlantic
   during the past 25,000 years. ***Earth and Planetary Science
   Letters*** 531, 115963.

- Süfke, F., Schulz, H., Scheen, J., Szidat, S., Regelous, M.,
   **Blaser, P.**, Pöppelmeier, F., Goepfert, T.J., Stocker, T.F.,
   Lippold, J. (2020). Inverse response of 231Pa/230Th to variations of
   the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation in the North
   Atlantic intermediate water. ***Geo-Mar******ine*** ***Lett******ers*** 40, 75–87.

- Vogt-Vincent, N., Lippold, J.,
   Kaboth-Bahr, S., **Blaser,
   P.** (2020). Ice-rafted debris as a source of non-conservative behaviour for the
   εNd palaeotracer: insights from a simple model. ***Geo-Mar******ine*** ***Lett******ers*** 40,
   325–340.

## **2****019**

- Süfke F., Pöppelmeier
   F., Goepfert T. J., Regelous M., Koutsodendris A., **Blaser
   P.**, Gutjahr M. and Lippold J.
   (2019). Constraints on the northwestern Atlantic deep water
   circulation from 231Pa/230Th
   during the last 30,000 years. ***Paleoceanography and
   Paleoclimatology*** *34,
   1945–1958.*

- **Blaser P.**, Frank M. and van de Flierdt T. (2019).
   Revealing past ocean circulation with neodymium isotopes. ***Past
   Global Changes Magazine*** 27, 54–55.

- Pöppelmeier F., Gutjahr M., **Blaser P.**, Oppo D. W.,
   Jaccard S. L., Regelous M., Huang K.-F., Süfke F. and Lippold J.
   (2019). Water mass gradients of the mid-depth Southwest Atlantic
   during the past 25,000 years. ***Earth and Planetary Science
   Letters***, 115963.

- Pöppelmeier F., **Blaser P.**, Gutjahr M., Süfke F.,
   Thornalley D. J. R., Grützner J., Jakob K. A., Link J. M., Szidat
   S. and Lippold J. (2019). Influence of Ocean Circulation and Benthic
   Exchange on Deep Northwest Atlantic Nd Isotope Records During the
   Past 30,000 Years. ***Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems*** 20, 4457–4469.

- Lippold J., Pöppelmeier F., Süfke F., Gutjahr M., Goepfert
   T. J., **Blaser P.**, Friedrich O., Link J. M., Wacker L.,
   Rheinberger S. and Jaccard S. L. (2019). Constraining the
   Variability of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
   During the Holocene. ***Geophysical Research Letters*** 46,
   11338–11346

- **Blaser P.**,
   Pöppelmeier F., Schulz H., Gutjahr M., Frank M., Lippold J.,
   Heinrich H., Link J. M., Hoffmann J., Szidat S. and Frank N. (2019).
   The resilience and sensitivity of Northeast Atlantic deep water εNd
   to overprinting by detrital fluxes over the past 30,000 years. ***Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta*** 245, 79–97.

## 2018

- **Blaser P.** and Jacek R. (2018). Undisturbed
   Measurements of Oxygen in Deep Sea Sediments with Oxygen Sensitive
   Foil, ***Application Note***, Heidelberg. Available at:
   https://www.presens.de/knowledge/publications/application-note/undisturbed-measurements-of-oxygen-in-deep-sea-sediments-with-oxygen-sensitive-foil-1598.html

- Pöppelmeier F., Gutjahr M., **Blaser P**., Keigwin
   L. D. and Lippold J. (2018). Origin of Abyssal NW Atlantic Water
   Masses Since the Last Glacial Maximum. ***Paleoceanography
   and Paleoclimatology*** 33,
   530–543.

## 2017

- Wefing A.-M., Arps J., **Blaser P**., Wienberg
   C., Hebbeln D. and Frank N. (2017). High precision U-series dating
   of scleractinian cold-water corals using an automated
   chromatographic U and Th extraction. ***Chemical Geology*** 475, 140–148.

## 2016

- Lippold J., Gutjahr M., **Blaser P.**, Christner
   E., de Carvalho Ferreira M. L., Mulitza S., Christl M., Wombacher
   F., Böhm E., Antz B., Cartapanis O., Vogel H. and Jaccard S. L.
   (2016). Deep water provenance and dynamics of the (de)glacial
   Atlantic meridional overturning circulation. ***Earth and
   Planetary Science Letters*** 445, 68–78.

- **Blaser P.**, Lippold J.,
   Gutjahr M., Frank N., Link J. M. and Frank M. (2016). Extracting
   foraminiferal seawater Nd isotope signatures from bulk deep sea
   sediment by chemical leaching. ***Chemical Geology*** 439, 189–204.

## 2015

- Böhm E., Lippold J.,
   Gutjahr M., Frank M., **Blaser P.**,
   Antz B., Fohlmeister J., Frank N., Andersen M. B. and Deininger M.
   (2015). Strong and deep Atlantic meridional overturning circulation
   during the last glacial cycle. ***Nature*** 517, 73–76.

# Journals reviewed for:

- Chemical Geology

- Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

- Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta

- Marine Geology

- Minerals

- Nature

- Nature Geoscience

- Quaternary Science Reviews

# Acquired funding:

2015: DFG research grant for 3 year PhD project on ocean
 circulation reconstruction of the past 1 Million years with Nd
 isotopes, proposed together with Jörg Lippold and Norbert Frank (~
 150 000€ )

2013: DFG research grant for own 3 year PhD project on Last Glacial
 Maximum ocean circulation reconstruction with Nd isotopes, proposed
 together with Jörg Lippold (~ 150 000€ )

unsuccessful funding proposal:

2020: Horizon 2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie Postdoctoral Fellowship
 proposal (rated with 87.6%)

# Student supervision:

## As principal **or** specialist supervisor

- Pfannschmidt J. (2020) Can concentration changes of Atlantic
   deep water Nd be estimated from Holocene end member variations?
   Bachelor’s thesis.

- Goetze G. L. (2019) Neodymium isotopic signature: Paleo scavenging
   versus water mass mixing. Bachelor’s thesis.

- Vogt-Vincent N. (2018) Ice-rafted debris as a source of
   non-conservative behaviour for the εNd palaeotracer: insights from
   a simple model. Visiting student from Oxford University, UK.

- Tagliavini M. (2018) Extraction of Rare Earth Elements from seawater
   employing sep-pak C18 cartridges. Bachelor’s thesis.

- Pöppelmeier F. (2016) Investigations of Authigenic Neodymium
   Sediment-Pore Water Interaction and Reconstruction of Deep Water
   Mass Sourcing in the North-East Atlantic. Master’s thesis.

- Link J. M. (2015) Rekonstruktion der Ozeanzirkulation im
   Nordatlantik während ausgewählter glazialer Terminationen der
   letzten 900 ka anhand von Neodymisotopen. Master’s thesis.

- Dietrich R. (2014) Konzentrationsbestimmungen Seltener Eden am
   ICP-QMS. Bachelor’s thesis.

- Förstel J. (2014) Messung von Lithium-Magnesium-Verhältnissen an
   einem iCAP Q™ Quadrupol-Massenspektrometer mit induktiv
   gekoppelter Plasmaionenquelle. Bachelor’s thesis.

- Eisinger P. (2014) Analysis and evaluation of a leaching procedure
   for the extraction of authigenic rare earth elements (REE) from
   marine sediments of the North Atlantic. Bachelor’s thesis.

- de Carvalho Ferreira M. L. (2013) Water mass reconstruction by Nd
   isotopic analysis from mid atlantic ocean sediments. Bachelor’s
   thesis.

## Co - supervised student theses

- Bollen M. (ongoing) Constraining past changes in
   remineralized carbon sequestration in Southern Ocean subsurface
   ocean water masses across the last glacial cycle. PhD thesis.

- Pöppelmeier F. (2019) The Atlantic water mass structure since the
   Last Glacial Maximum: New insights from Nd isotopes. PhD thesis.

- Süfke F. (2020) The application of Pa/Th in the Atlantic Ocean for
   the reconstruction of past circulation strength. PhD thesis.

- Link J. M. (2021) 900 ka of Nd-isotope changes in the deep North
   Atlantic. PhD thesis.

- Kullik V. (2017) Rekonstruktion der Zirkulation im NO-Atlantik der
   letzten 30 ka unter dem Einfluss von Mittelmeerwasser anhand der
   Neodymisotopie. Master’s thesis.

- Hauck L. (2017) Rekonstruktion der Zirkulation im westlichen
   Nordatlantik über die letzten 30 ka mittels der Neodymisotopie von
   Blake Bahama Outer Ridge Sedimenten. Master’s thesis.

## Supervised experimental courses

- practical training course in
   physics for earth scientists

- practical experiments in physical limnology
